chore(blog): add ashmit spotlight story (#3726)
asyncapi/website: markdown/blog/community-spotlight-ashmit.md

---
title: "From Mentee to Maintainer: The Ashmit GSoC Story!"

> date: 2025-03-10T06:00:00+01:00

Reviewer: Before approving, change the date to the 17th

Reviewer: @iambami I see you didn't change the date

> date: 2025-03-10T06:00:00+01:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2025-03-17T06:00:00+01:00
```

Reviewer: I'll commit directly to your branch @iambami

---
title: "From Mentee to Maintainer: The Ashmit GSoC Story!"
date: 2025-01-20T06:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - Interview
  - Spotlight
  - Community
cover: /img/posts/marketing-images/ashmit-story.webp
authors:
  - name: Atinuke Oluwabamikemi Kayode
    photo: /img/avatars/bami.webp
    link: https://www.linkedin.com/in/atinuke-oluwabamikemi-kayode-5b838b1b7/
    byline: AsyncAPI Community Marketing Specialist

> excerpt: 'Being patient is important as a maintainer because sometimes the contributors don't have it, so you have to keep yours. Says, Ashmit. A third-year Bachelor of Technology student in Computer Science from India.'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
excerpt: "Being patient is important as a maintainer because sometimes the contributors don't have it, so you have to keep yours. Says, Ashmit. A third-year Bachelor of Technology student in Computer Science from India."
```

---

> Open-source contributions have long been a gateway for developers to refine their skills, build meaningful projects, and connect with a global community. For many, the journey starts with small contributions, but for some, it evolves into a leadership role that impacts the project’s future. One such inspiring story is that of [Ashmit Jagtap](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ashmit-jagtap/), whose path from a Google Summer of Code (GSoC) mentee to a maintainer within AsyncAPI showcases dedication, learning, and a deep commitment to open-source development. In this blog post, we explore his journey, the challenges he faced, and the lessons he learned along the way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open Source contributions have long been a gateway for developers to refine their skills, build meaningful projects, and connect with a global community. For many, the journey starts with small contributions, but for some, it evolves into a leadership role that impacts the project’s future. One such inspiring story is that of [Ashmit Jagtap](https://www.linkedin.com/in/ashmit-jagtap/), whose path from a Google Summer of Code (GSoC) mentee to a maintainer within AsyncAPI showcases dedication, learning, and a deep commitment to open-source development. In this blog post, we explore his journey, challenges, and the lessons he learned.
```

## The GSoC Experience: A Transformative Phase

> Ashmit’s open-source journey began with his participation in GSoC, an esteemed program that connects aspiring developers with organizations working on impactful projects. His decision to contribute to the AsyncAPI Initiative was fueled by his interest in API documentation and event-driven architectures. As a mentee, he worked on refining the AsyncAPI Conference website and was mentored by experienced contributors who provided guidance, code reviews, and architectural insights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ashmit’s open-source journey began with his participation in GSoC, an esteemed program that connects aspiring developers with organizations working on impactful projects. His interest in API documentation and event-driven architectures fueled his decision to contribute to the AsyncAPI Initiative. As a mentee, he worked on refining the AsyncAPI Conference website, and he was mentored by experienced contributors who provided guidance, code reviews, and architectural insights.
```

> Reflecting on his GSoC experience, Ashmit emphasizes the steep learning curve and the importance of proactive engagement. He recalls, “Initially, I was overwhelmed by the scale of the project, but the community was incredibly supportive. I learned how to navigate large codebases, improve my problem-solving skills, and contribute in a structured manner.” This phase allowed him to grasp not only the technical aspects of the project but also the collaborative spirit of open-source communities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reflecting on his GSoC experience, Ashmit emphasizes the steep learning curve and the importance of proactive engagement. He recalls, “Initially, I was overwhelmed by the scale of the project, but the community was incredibly supportive. I learned how to navigate large codebases, improve my problem-solving skills, and contribute in a structured manner.” This phase allowed him to grasp not only the technical aspects of the project but also the collaborative spirit of open-source communities.
```

> We then asked Ashmit some questions about his GSoC experience with the AsyncAPI Initiative. Below is an outline of our conversation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then asked Ashmit about his GSoC experience with the AsyncAPI Initiative. Below, I've included an outline of our conversation.
```

> We further went ahead to ask Ashmit some questions about his GSoC experience with the AsyncAPI Initiative. Below is the outline of our conversation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We then asked Ashmit some questions about his GSoC experience with the AsyncAPI Initiative. Below is an outline of our conversation.
```

## Getting Started with Google Summer of Code and AsyncAPI

**Bami: What inspired you to apply for Google Summer of Code with AsyncAPI?**

> ***Ashmit:** Google Summer of Code had been a goal of mine since my first year of college when I first learned about it. However, I knew it was a competitive program, so I focused on building my skills. By my second year, I was ready to start contributing and began working towards it in January. Initially, I aimed to contribute to Postman, which serves as the umbrella organization for AsyncAPI and JSON Schema. My contributions to both projects led to my selection in AsyncAPI.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** Google Summer of Code had been a goal of mine since my first year of college when I first learned about it. However, I knew it was a competitive program, so I focused on building my skills. I was ready to contribute by my second year and began working towards it in January. Initially, I aimed to contribute to Postman, but my contributions to both projects led to my selection for AsyncAPI.*
```

**Bami: How did you first learn about AsyncAPI, and what motivated you to contribute to the community?**

> ***Ashmit:** I discovered AsyncAPI while exploring Postman’s GSoC issues. The event-driven architecture and the mission of promoting open-source software intrigued me. My first significant interaction was with the VS Code extension for AsyncAPI, which allows users to preview YAML files. Later, I explored AsyncAPI React and the CLI tool. However, my primary project ended up being the conference website, which was the most active repository at the time due to an upcoming event.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** I discovered AsyncAPI while exploring Postman’s GSoC issues. The event-driven architecture and the mission of promoting open-source software intrigued me. My first significant interaction was with the VS Code extension for AsyncAPI, which allows users to preview YAML files. Later, I explored AsyncAPI React and the CLI tool. However, my primary project was the conference website, the most active repository due to an upcoming event.*
```

## The Project: Revamping the AsyncAPI Conference Website

> **Bami: Can you tell us about your project, the problem it solved, and why was it  important?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Bami: Can you tell us about your project, the problem it solved, and why was it  important?**
```
```suggestion
**Bami: Can you tell us about your project, the problem it solved, and why was it important?**
```

> **Bami: Can you tell us about your project, the problem it solved, and why it was important?**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Bami: Can you tell us about your project, the problem it solved, and why was it  important?**
```

> ***Ashmit:** The primary goal of my project was to make maintaining the conference website easier. Previously, every year, the website had to be rebuilt or heavily refactored due to a lack of a consistent theme or streamlined process. This created a significant workload for maintainers. My project aimed to standardize the codebase, making it easier to update and maintain. Additionally, I introduced automated testing to simplify reviewing contributions, ensuring that new changes wouldn’t break existing functionality.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** The primary goal of my project was to make maintaining the conference website easier. Previously, the website had to be rebuilt or heavily refactored yearly due to a lack of a consistent theme or streamlined process, creating a significant workload for maintainers. My project aimed to standardize the codebase, making it easier to update and maintain. Additionally, I introduced automated testing to simplify reviewing contributions, ensuring that new changes wouldn’t break existing functionality.*
```

## Challenges and Learning Experiences

**Bami: What was the most challenging part of your project, and how did you overcome it?**

> ***Ashmit:** The most unexpected challenge occurred towards the end of the program when my project wouldn’t build just before the final submission deadline. After deliberation, we decided to merge the pull request and troubleshoot the issue later. Unfortunately, this caused the website to crash temporarily. My mentors and I worked intensively for a few hours to restore functionality. It was a stressful moment, but it reinforced the importance of testing and careful deployment.*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** The most unexpected challenge occurred towards the end of the program when my project wouldn’t build successfully just before the final submission deadline. After deliberation, we decided to merge the pull request and troubleshoot the issue later. Unfortunately, this action caused the website to crash temporarily. My mentors and I worked intensively for a few hours to restore website functionality. It was a stressful moment, but it reinforced the importance of testing and careful deployment.*
```

> ***Ashmit:** The most unexpected challenge occurred towards the end of the program when my project wouldn’t build successfully just before the final submission deadline. After deliberation, we decided to merge the pull request and troubleshoot the issue later. Unfortunately, this action caused the website to crash temporarily. My mentors and I worked intensively for a few hours to restore website functionality. It was a stressful moment, but it reinforced the importance of testing and careful deployment.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** The most unexpected challenge occurred towards the end of the program when my project wouldn’t build successfully just before the final submission deadline. After deliberation, we merged the pull request and troubleshoot the issue later. Unfortunately, this action caused the website to crash temporarily. My mentors and I worked intensively for a few hours to restore website functionality. It was stressful, but it reinforced the importance of testing and careful deployment.*
```

**Bami: What technologies and skills did you use for your project? Did you have to learn anything new?**

> ***Ashmit:** My project primarily used JavaScript, with a focus on Next.js for the frontend. For testing, I used Cypress for end-to-end testing. While I didn’t learn a completely new programming language during GSoC, I did have to learn TypeScript during the proposal phase and improve my understanding of testing methodologies.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** My project primarily used JavaScript, focusing on Next.js for the front end. For testing, I used Cypress for end-to-end testing. While I didn’t learn a completely new programming language during GSoC, I did have to learn TypeScript during the proposal phase and improve my understanding of testing methodologies.*
```

## Community Experience and Mentorship

**Bami: How was your experience with the AsyncAPI community and your mentors?**

> ***Ashmit:** My mentors, [Maya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aishatmuibudeen/), [Thule](https://www.linkedin.com/in/v-thulisile-sibanda/), and [Ace](https://www.linkedin.com/in/acebuild/), were incredibly supportive. I’ve been involved with AsyncAPI for nearly a year now and have been a maintainer for about five months. The community is hardworking, collaborative, and always looking to improve the project. The mentorship aspect was especially valuable in helping me balance my college studies with my GSoC responsibilities. My mentors were understanding and even took on tasks when I was unavailable.*

Reviewer: Please use the mentor's full, correct names

> ***Ashmit:** My mentors, [Maya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aishatmuibudeen/), [Thule](https://www.linkedin.com/in/v-thulisile-sibanda/), and [Ace](https://www.linkedin.com/in/acebuild/), were incredibly supportive. I’ve been involved with AsyncAPI for nearly a year now and have been a maintainer for about five months. The community is hardworking, collaborative, and always looking to improve the project. The mentorship aspect was especially valuable in helping me balance my college studies with my GSoC responsibilities. My mentors were understanding and even took on tasks when I was unavailable.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** My mentors, [Maya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aishatmuibudeen/), [Thule](https://www.linkedin.com/in/v-thulisile-sibanda/), and [Ace](https://www.linkedin.com/in/acebuild/), were incredibly supportive. I’ve been involved with AsyncAPI for nearly a year and have been a maintainer for about five months. The community is hardworking, collaborative, and always looking to improve the project. The mentorship aspect was especially valuable in helping me balance my college studies with my GSoC responsibilities. My mentors were understanding and even took on tasks when I was unavailable.*
```

**Bami: Did you face any unexpected challenges or surprises during the program?**

> ***Ashmit:** Apart from the final submission issue, everything went smoothly. However, the most unexpected challenge was adapting to remote collaboration. Before GSoC, I wasn’t very experienced with remote work. The program helped me develop skills in asynchronous communication and project management, which are crucial in open source and professional environments.*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** Apart from the final submission issue, everything went smoothly. However, the most unexpected challenge was adapting to remote collaboration. Before GSoC, I wasn’t very experienced with remote work. The program helped me develop skills in asynchronous communication and project management, which are crucial in open source and professional environments alike.*
```

> ***Ashmit:** Apart from the final submission issue, everything went smoothly. However, the most unexpected challenge was adapting to remote collaboration. Before GSoC, I wasn’t very experienced with remote work. The program helped me develop skills in asynchronous communication and project management, which are crucial in open source and professional environments alike.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** Everything went smoothly apart from the final submission issue. However, the most unexpected challenge was adapting to remote collaboration. Before GSoC, I wasn’t very experienced with remote work. The program helped me develop asynchronous communication and project management skills, which are crucial in open-source and professional environments.*
```

## Key Takeaways and Advice for Future GSoC Mentees

**Bami: What were your key takeaways from the GSoC experience?**

***Ashmit:** One of my biggest takeaways was that anything is achievable with hard work and patience. Initially, I doubted my chances of being selected, but I put in the effort and succeeded. Another key lesson was the importance of structured workflows in open-source projects, which significantly improves maintainability.*

**Bami: Has this experience changed your perception of open source? Was this your first time contributing?**

> ***Ashmit:** No, this wasn’t my first open-source experience. I previously participated in Hacktoberfest 2021 when they still gave out T-shirts! However, being a GSoC mentee and later a maintainer was a completely different experience. As a mentee, you focus on individual contributions, whereas a maintainer oversees multiple contributions and ensures the stability of the project. It gave me a deeper appreciation of the responsibilities maintainers handle.*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** No, this wasn’t my first open-source experience. I previously participated in Hacktoberfest 2021 when they still gave out T-shirts! However, being a GSoC mentee and later a maintainer was a completely different experience. As a mentee, you focus on individual contributions, whereas as a maintainer, you oversees multiple contributions and ensure the stability of the project. It gave me a deeper appreciation of the responsibilities maintainers handle.*
```

> ***Ashmit:** No, this wasn’t my first open-source experience. I previously participated in Hacktoberfest 2021 when they still gave out T-shirts! However, being a GSoC mentee and later a maintainer was a completely different experience. As a mentee, you focus on individual contributions, whereas as a maintainer, you oversees multiple contributions and ensure the stability of the project. It gave me a deeper appreciation of the responsibilities maintainers handle.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** No, this wasn’t my first open-source experience. I previously participated in Hacktoberfest 2021, when they still gave out T-shirts! However, being a GSoC mentee and later a maintainer was a completely different experience. As a mentee, you focus on individual contributions, whereas as a maintainer, you oversee multiple contributions and ensure the stability of the project. It gave me a deeper appreciation of the responsibilities maintainers handle.*
```

**Bami: Any advice for future GSoC mentees or newcomers to AsyncAPI?**

> ***Ashmit:** I have two main pieces of advice: be patient and work hard. Open source is community-driven, and maintainers often have full-time jobs, so responses to contributions can take time. Patience is essential. Hard work is equally important—keep learning, refining your skills, and making meaningful contributions.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** I have two main pieces of advice: be patient and work hard. Open Source is community-driven, and maintainers often have full-time jobs, so responses to contributions can take time. Patience is essential. Hard work is equally important—keep learning, refining your skills, and making meaningful contributions.*
```

## Looking Ahead: What’s Next for Ashmit?

**Bami: What are your plans after GSoC? Will you continue contributing to AsyncAPI or explore other open-source projects?**

> ***Ashmit:** Right now, I am focusing on completing my degree and securing a position in a good software company. However, I will continue contributing to open source because it has given me so much, and I feel a responsibility to give back. While AsyncAPI remains my primary focus, I am also interested in projects like Chromium, though I know it’s quite a challenging one to take on.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** I am currently focusing on completing my degree and securing a position in a good software company. However, I will continue contributing to open source because it has given me so much, and I feel a responsibility to give back. While AsyncAPI remains my primary focus, I am also interested in projects like Chromium, though I know it’s quite a challenging one to take on.*
```

**Bami: Are there any new features or improvements you’d like to see in AsyncAPI?**

> ***Ashmit:** Specifically for the conference website, I have some ideas for future improvements. However, in general, AsyncAPI is constantly evolving, and I look forward to contributing to its growth and helping the community in any way I can.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** Specifically for the conference website, I have some ideas for future improvements. However, AsyncAPI is constantly evolving, and I look forward to contributing to its growth and helping the community in any way I can.*
```

To add a bit of fun to our spotlight interview, we played a **"This or That"* game with Ashmit. 

**Bami: Okay, so I have a fun activity to do with you. It is called this for that. So Github or Gitlab.**

***Ashmit:** Github*

**Bami: Slack or discord.**

***Ashmit:** Discord*

**Bami: LinkedIn or Twitter?**

***Ashmit:** Neither. I deleted both of them just this week. Yeah, both are toxic in their own ways to be honest.*

**Bami: Google Docs or Microsoft Word.**

***Ashmit:** Google Docs.*

**Bami VS code or X code**

***Ashmit:** Vs code*

**Bami: Window or Linux**

***Ashmit:** Linux. Not hardcore Linux like fedora though.* 

**Bami: Apple or Samsung.**

***Ashmit:** Samsung*

**Bami: How do you like to spend your time outside coding? Do you have any hobby or interest?**

***Ashmit:** For hobbies, I might say cooking is one of them. Yeah I do like to cook sometimes because if I have some free time that's where I go towards the kitchen.* 

> **Bami: Is there anyone or a lot of people you would like to thank or give shout out to from the community or the GSoC program, either your other mentees, your mentors or other community members.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Bami: Is there anyone or a lot of people you would like to thank or give a shout-out to from the community or the GSoC program, either your other mentees, your mentors, or other community members.**
```

> ***Ashmit:** My mentors are the ones who I would like to give shout out to like is [Maya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aishatmuibudeen/), [Thule](https://www.linkedin.com/in/v-thulisile-sibanda/), and [Ace](https://www.linkedin.com/in/acebuild/). And on top of that, I would like to thank [Lukasz](https://www.linkedin.com/in/lukasz-gornicki-a621914/) as well because he has been quite helpful. There were some issues in my project that required his Assistance throughout and he was there for it. Honestly, that's quite very nice of him because he doesn't have to do it.*

Reviewer: Please use full, correct names

> ***Ashmit:** My mentors are the ones who I would like to give shout out to like is [Maya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aishatmuibudeen/), [Thule](https://www.linkedin.com/in/v-thulisile-sibanda/), and [Ace](https://www.linkedin.com/in/acebuild/). And on top of that, I would like to thank [Lukasz](https://www.linkedin.com/in/lukasz-gornicki-a621914/) as well because he has been quite helpful. There were some issues in my project that required his Assistance throughout and he was there for it. Honestly, that's quite very nice of him because he doesn't have to do it.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ashmit:** My mentors are the ones who I would like to shout out to like is [Maya](https://www.linkedin.com/in/aishatmuibudeen/), [Thule](https://www.linkedin.com/in/v-thulisile-sibanda/), and [Ace](https://www.linkedin.com/in/acebuild/). And on top of that, I would like to thank [Lukasz](https://www.linkedin.com/in/lukasz-gornicki-a621914/) for being quite helpful. Some issues in my project required his assistance, and he was there for them. That's nice of him because he didn't have to do it.*
```

For those considering GSoC or open-source contributions, Ashmit advises, *“Start with issues labeled ‘good first issue,’ ask questions, and don’t be afraid to make mistakes. Open-source communities thrive on collaboration and learning together.”*

> Ashmit Jagtap’s story is a testament to the power of open-source in shaping careers and fostering innovation. His transition from a GSoC mentee to an AsyncAPI maintainer underscores the importance of dedication, community engagement, and continuous learning. Whether you are a beginner exploring open-source or an experienced developer looking to give back, Ashmit’s journey serves as an inspiration to take that first step, contribute meaningfully, and grow within the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ashmit Jagtap’s story is a testament to the power of open source in shaping careers and fostering innovation. His transition from a GSoC mentee to an AsyncAPI maintainer underscores the importance of dedication, community engagement, and continuous learning. Whether you are a beginner exploring open-source or an experienced developer looking to give back, Ashmit’s journey inspires you to take that first step, contribute meaningfully, and grow within the community.
```

> At AsyncAPI, we welcome new contributors and encourage them to embark on their own open-source journey. Who knows? Your story might be the next one we celebrate!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At AsyncAPI, we welcome new contributors and encourage them to embark on their open-source journeys. Who knows—your story might be the next one we celebrate!
```
